---
title: "My attempt at creating more"
created_at: 2019-08-29 21:00:00 -0300
kind: article
tags: ['hello world']
---

I began blogging in the now prehistoric late 2000s.

I've done a few blogs about different subjects (computer science, algorithms, web development, short stories and political ramblings). I've had blogs on Blogspot, Wordpress and, more recently, Medium.

Those platforms were (or are, I suppose) an easy way to spew your ideas over the Internet while also being nice and comfy for other people to actually read (this last point is important for the CSS-challenged such as yours truly). In other words, those services Got Shit Done™.

<!-- more -->

Alas, as I opened my eyes to the wonders of web development I started noticing a few things. First, Wordpress is written in PHP, which is gross (just kidding). Second, you don't really control much: you can pick themes or whatever, but you won't have the full control you'd have by creating a website from scratch or nearly scratch. Third, and maybe a corollary to the previous point, that stuff is *bloated*. There's approximately 3 terabytes of mostly useless javascript, ads and all kind of crap I don't care about.

But most importantly, I realized the hidden costs of most "free" web services. You don't really own anything. You provide content, and Wordpress or Google or whoever serves that content to your audience together with whatever else they see fit.

I won't pretend these ideas are new. They aren't! I feel there's been an increasing amount of [Web 1.0 nostalgia](https://code.divshot.com/geo-bootstrap/) going on, and a big part of that is probably fueled by [similar sentiments](https://tjcx.me/posts/consumption-distraction/) as those I described. The [longing for simplicity](https://thebestmotherfucking.website/) in a world of trillions of new JS frameworks is also quite widespread these days.

### So I built this

I tried [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) for a while, but I found myself endlessly tweaking CSS details and config files and weird deployment issues instead of actually improving the blog or writing stuff, so I gave up on that and started this thing. The goals were to create the simplest possible blogging system with as little fluff as possible.

This small project is nothing special. There are [much better projects](https://github.com/remko/blog-skeleton) [available for free](https://clarkdave.net/2012/02/building-a-static-blog-with-nanoc/) on the interwebs done by people that actually know what they're doing with a CSS file. This here is just a tiny vase with some ugly flowers -- it would be ridiculous to compare it to the beautiful walled gardens of Medium or Wordpress. But, ugly as they are, they're **mine**!

